How was it that Dr. Suttle was involved? Well, Dr.
Suttle was involved.
He was fairly active in the cyclotron project.
More detail end up with that. We went into the arts
and science. Dr. Sowell and Mr. Ruddard used him
primarily
for his research know-how. He built our research
programs here university-wide, not just
engineering, and also to assess
people. He used to sit in on all of the places we
used. It was out of the value of commanding the
system. which is almost entirely from the
research point of view, which is why I didn't mind
one thing or give it to some of the other fellows who
had responsibility
for the education side of things. But Suttle was
the advocate of research, technically. Now there
are lots of stories that float around about the
psychotron and the funding for the psychotron.
One of them I've heard that I don't, I wonder if
there's a myth in that, is that Princeton was
supposed to get the money and Princeton already
had a bulldog for it. Is that a mere myth? I don't
think it was Princeton, I think it was Maryland. We
in Maryland were essentially competitors and we
got the money. And
really it's been a very useful instrument.
Shortly after we brought it here,
of course, they determined that this was a useful
device for treating cancer.
So we worked, you know, for years with the MD
Anderson people in Houston. One of our young men in
nuclear engineering. at UCLA now. We developed
the procedures for determining the dose rates
required to treat people and essentially
we developed that procedure. Now of course it's
much more sophisticated now. Most of the major
cancer facilities have their own beam machines,
not all of them are cyclotrons that they use for
treatment. for the work actually. Didn't
radiation therapy go on, research go on here even
in the 50s? We were big in that. That's one I forgot.
We were very big in radiation research. Right
after World War II, Sidney Brown, who was a
biologist, did most of his work in the engineering
sperm stations, but we were the only people who
were really supporting and encouraging to get on
with this. And
then we used to do a lot of these work with Spanish
goats. We kept those Spanish goats out there right
next to the nuclear science center. And that old
facility is still out there. It's not used to it,
but you can see it. It's pretty well fallen down due
to the wooden construction. Sidney Brown, at one
time, was probably one of the leading experts in
this country in radiation protection. Is this the
same type of research that has been going on in the
60s with the medical radiation therapy? I suppose
they were joined together sometime, but not here.
If that joining was done, it was probably not going
to be answered. George Price was the last man. I
don't know if you've run into Price or not. George
Price was the last man that we had in the radiation
biology area. Of course, that sort of... research
has not been done much in recent years. What
year,
or approximately what year was it that you got the
MD Anderson and the Keys got together? I would
guess it was sometime in the 70s, early 70s.
I don't think we did, did we? Maybe we did. It
started pretty quickly after Psychotron was
finished. I don't know what I want. The catalogue,
and that's the directory of former troops, when
things happened.
Okay,
that was, the
cyclotron was erected
in 67,
about six million dollars. So I would guess that
work started even in 69 or 70. Well, it started
pretty quickly after we had the cyclotron.
Which
of the many projects that CASE has started since
you've been here are you most proud of being
involved in? I don't know. I enjoyed all of the work
that we did. It's really hard to say. I suppose that
the work that I'm most proud of actually is the
highway safety research work that we started for
the Transportation
Institute. Because I was almost directly
responsible for getting that started. A lot of
people said we couldn't do it. We began that work
back in the early 63. and the breakaway signs and
the impact attenuators that have been built on
highways around this country have saved lots of
people's lives. And those are all developed here?
Those are all developed here. You can find lots of
people playing a responsibility for it later in
the year. We know where it all came from. And
unfortunately we didn't happen to be able to see
it. It was all done in the open area. Oil shortage
in the mid-70s affected research. Yes. When the
oil shortage came along, it was pretty obvious
that ultimately there had to be a replacement for
petroleum. And it's still true. Ultimately,
we've got it. So we began then to take a look at what
are
alternate fuels that you can use to replace
petroleum. Of course when you do that you begin to
look at the fuels that you can get from coal, from
renewable resources like wood and plant
materials and that sort of thing. So we started
with our organ fuels program and a chemical
engineering people that developed a system that
was able to run the standard automobile that was
sold in this country on methanol, methyl alcohol,
and that was successful. We started a program in
which we were trying to Recovered gas from late
night by burning it in the
ground. That wasn't very successful. And we took a
look at a lot of other things like flurry
suspension of the coal, other
ways of burning coal. We did quite a wide variety of
research. problems
came into being, most of which are still . Was TCI
involved in the search of the 55 speed limit in
terms of energy consumption? No. That was done
because I was . Anybody think there's anything
substantial about that? Have
you had any
changes
in your attitude over time? Looking back, when you
first took the job, his is still the same, and his
goals are still the same. No, I haven't changed my
mind about what we ought to do. goals
we have to try to reach. Essentially a two-fold
goal, to carry on activities which would be
important in the state of Texas and to contribute
to the educational programs here in Indiana. We
work from time to time with a lot of other programs
besides this.
I would ask your opinion on a definition that is
often argued over, the difference
between pure
science and technology. What they generally say
is that if you look at the basics of what you call
pure science,
done for no good reason
except just to know what's
going on. We have
to know what the facts are. Whereas most applied
research is all technology, I guess. It really has
a basic goal. It's an alternative fuel project. We
started out with the idea that methanol was
probably our best fuel
the standpoint of competitiveness economics.
And that if we were going to be forced to use it, that
we'd have to take the automobiles right off the
street and convert them. And we did that
successfully. That's very much applied to . Is
there any other, are there any other projects that
I haven't asked you about? Well, there probably
are some. I know there are others.
Don't want to be an old man like I am just to slip you
by. One thing I'd like to ask you is what is your
exact title? Exact title? Well, I'm Dean
Emeritus. Okay. I'm working part-time for the and
for them, I'm a research engineer.
Well, I had read that you retired in 1980, was it?
Yeah, 1980. But you maintained your connections
with the Research Foundation? I stayed on with the
Research Foundation because I felt I had not
really done for them what I should. And they paid
part of my salary. No,
I was over there two years. I had several
connections with them in 82. Last year I didn't do
anything. I didn't get paid. This year I'm working
on a project. Are you working on a particular
project for them? No, I generally work on taking a
look at things. We ought to be doing it or not. We
ought to quit or that sort of thing. And in that
general direction, how has TEAS established over
the years what projects are
ready to die? Well, that's a tough question.
That's, of course, the hardest question of all of
them. We need to reach the point where it's been
worthwhile for any more time than that would do it
for us. You may have
heard there's a plan going on right now about
nuclear weapons, what we ought to do about it. The
time has come when those decisions are going to
have to be made. The American people are very
scared to death of having any sort of nuclear
involvements, power, what have you. So
it looks like this is something that
really may not be worthwhile doing at this time.
Take a look at it and see whether or not this is the
time to abandon it. We did a lot of work here in the
early years of our nuclear program in an area we
called Activation Analysis. But
that's still going
on here in the Department
of Chemistry. But we decided, for our purposes,
that we had reached the end of the line, and we
transferred the program to chemistry, and they
changed it to a much more fun little type program.
In terms of administration, in the late 50s, Teas
also became administrator of The
data processing center
and all those, is this a purely administrative
function or? No. Why was this, why? The reason we
were in the computer business is because we were
the only ones that would do it. We were the only ones
that could do it. Yeah, the experiment station, a
very small 5DM machine in our direction. That
said, I do
not think it applies for us to put any more of our
research into this arena than we have now. We
cannot support the education program, research
programs, and engineering as much as we can. So, if
there's going to be anything more sophisticated
around here, somebody else is going to take it up.
So
we decided that we would see what we could do
to produce the next processing program that would
serve our engineering people and would also serve
the college generally. It was actually a borrowed
money. And we would buy the IBM 650, which was a
working machine that we had. and
we built
the warden building and the
processing
center building over there. And over here, we
steadily increase the capabilities of that
facility. Of course, the computers are now facing
the full scheme of things. The system is going back
to a centralized type of system in which everybody
has a computer. So there's not the need now to
centralize the facility. Well, we ran that
facility for years. And the truth of
the matter is, we subsidized Texas A&M University
very substantially in computing. The better part
of that, they were cutting the church short. Why?
They never would have wanted to work in the
computer industry. Do we need to research,
please? Are we used to engineering computers? I
think it was worthwhile
for
Ortiz to get involved.
From the standpoint of the total operation, yes. I
think we made a real contribution to the whole
thing. From the standpoint of the administrative
headaches, the legislative headaches, and the
arguments with the university,
no. It wasn't until that time in our engineering
program. But it wouldn't have gotten better. It
wouldn't have gotten better. Do
you feel
that way about any of the other programs that are
administrated by Phoenix? Was there an impact on
the university
as a whole? Well, there probably are
no
others that I can think of that the impact on the
university as a whole. Did you have any of the, now
that and
has come
up with the agreements with NTRM and that type of
thing. Did you have any university cooperation at
all? No, we didn't get to that point actually. The
things that I did primarily were to try to work more
broadly here on this campus. And we were too
successful in those operations. the
idea of going out and broadening the search for
some of the other universities in the state while
we talked about it. We never did that. It's not
something that was brand new. It was an idea that
was back there. Yeah, it was an idea. Is that the way
you generally find
research develops around here, ideas of a
long-term career? Is there anything else you'd
like to add? Offhand, I don't think, but it's been
pretty well covered. It's been tough getting all
that together, but it's been very informative.
Well,
I think the injury experimentation is going to be a
great contribution to the story, and a great
contribution to the state of Texas. The country is
facing a lot of problems, and we're having a little
more jealousy than we used to. So we can do what we
have to do to get things done. That's my answer.
Thank you.
We actually
had a pretty fair
stake in starting
the research program here in Mexico. Because that
came out of the nuclear radiation out of the high
towers. And we're here largely because of our
cause. Well,
it's very well since
then. Haven't you done that often? You're at peace
to develop something and hand it over and say, this
is... Getting over that jealousy is what's
hard. I'm not sure. Tried that out on some
of my colleagues. They'd say I'm crazy, but that's
the way I look at it. Well,
I appreciate all your time. And I'm sure I'll come
up with some other questions. I'm going to try to
ask you particular questions. As far as the
generator of goings, the 15 years I've been around
here, most of that came out of right here. That's
what it seems. He was with it.
Was he the doer or was he the one who got others to do
it? No, he was the one who got other people to do it.
He was the medic. But I mean, he encouraged you.
Yeah. Well, if you can get other people to do it. He
encouraged people to do a lot of things. I mean, you
go down and talk to some guy about something, and he
goes, well, I've got to do it. It's pretty hard to
work with a church. I got you on the back of your
head. It must be a real try. It's going to happen.
That makes a lot
of difference to one another.
And if you got in trouble, why didn't you give back?
Pardon me, sir, but it was the best thing that ever
happened to me.